Saving Templates
================

If you often go through the motions of setting up the same information
in each new Session you create, such as the number of input and output
Channels, the number and names of Tracks or Busses, or the Routing, then
you may wish to create a Template of that information instead.

With a **Template**, you can re-create your current working Session
*without*all the Region information files. Templates are useful if, for
example, you're doing extensive Routing on Tracks and Buses and want to
save the Editor Window's state for use in other Sessions. An example
might be a Template to record Tracks of drums, bass, guitar and vocals,
each with their own input on the soundcard, which you might use as a
basis for each Session you created in that situation. \

Save a Template
---------------

You can save a new Template from the Main Menu: *Session \> Save
Template* \

![template\_save.png](static/Ardour-saving-template_save-en.png)

After which you can give the new Template a name:

![template\_save\_example.png](static/Ardour-saving-template_save_example-en.png)\

Load a Template
---------------

When creating a new Session, you get can also load up a previously saved
Template:

![template\_open.png](static/Ardour-saving-template_open-en.png)

The example Template that was just created can be loaded from
'*/home/yourname/.Ardour2*' (or '*/Usr/yourname/.Ardour2*' on OSX ) :

![template\_load\_home.png](static/Ardour-saving-template_load_home-en.png)

There are also several example Templates to be found in
'*usr/share/yourname*', each set up for a number of Tracks:

![template\_load\_share.png](static/Ardour-saving-template_load_share-en.png)\

On OSX you can find these in
'*/Applications/Ardour2.app/Contents/Resources/share/ardour2/templates/'.*

Conclusion
----------

Congratulations, you have reached the end of the *Introducing
Ardour*FLOSS Manual! We hope that this manual has been useful for you to
learn the key functions of Ardour: **Installing Ardour**, **Getting
Started**, **Starting Sessions**, **Editing Sessions**, **Mixing
Sessions** and **Saving Sessions**.

In the following section, the **Appendices**, we have included some
extra information we thought would be useful to new users of Ardour,
including how to get **Further Help**, a **Glossary** of technical terms
used in this manual, some **Links** to further information about Ardour
on the Internet and, last but not least, the **Credits** of those
involved in creating this FLOSS Manual.

Thanks for reading, and if you have some knowledge about Ardour that is
not included here, please remember that this manual can be edited on the
web at
[http://en.flossmanuals.net/bin/view/Ardour/WebHome](http://en.flossmanuals.net/bin/view/Ardour/WebHome).
Changes made there will be reviewed by the FLOSS Manuals moderators for
inclusion into new editions of this manual. \

