Exporting Ranges
================

**Exporting** is the process of saving a Region, Track or Session to a
file on your computer. As we learned previously, Exporting a Region does
not Export all of the changes you might have made to that Region. To
Export edits such as **Normalizing**, **Fading** and **Panning**, and
**Automation**, you must Export either a Range or the entire Session.

To Export a range, select the **Select/Move Ranges**tool, then
Right-Click **Export** **range** or use the top menu: *Session \> Export
\> Export selected ranges to audiofile*.

![exportrange1.png](static/Ardour-Export-exportrange1-en.png)

Since the Export is handled through the Master Bus, every Track within
the Range you select is Exported together, exactly as they play back in
your Session. Unlike the Export Region command, this kind of Export
includes any Normalizing, Fading and Panning, and Automation you have
created, along with the individual edits made to the Regions as well. If
any of the Tracks have the Mute or Solo buttons engaged, this will also
affect which Tracks are heard in the Exported file.

![exportrange5.png](static/Ardour-Export-exportrange5-en.png)

![exportrange2.png](static/Ardour-Export-exportrange2-en.png)

This opens a dialogue box with several options. Generally, you will want
to export a Stereo mix as an **AIFF** or **WAV** file, at either
**16-bit** or **24-bit**. 16-bit files can be burnt directly to an audio
CD, but if you intend the audio to be further processed, it is best to
export at 24-bit. Having chosen your options, enter the track name at
the top and select *Export*.

Define the output channels by selecting them: left and right are normal
stereo outputs.

![exportrange3.png](static/Ardour-Export-exportrange3-en.png)

To export only specific Tracks, de-select the master outs, and click the
”Specific tracks” button and select the channel(s) of the Track(s) you
wish to Export.

![exportrange4\_1](static/Ardour-Export-exportrange4_1-en.png "exportrange4_1")

*Warning: overwriting existing files causes Ardour to become confused,
resulting in empty files being Exported. Be sure to use a unique file
name each time you Export!*

![exportregion4\_1.png](static/Ardour-Export-exportregion4_1-en_1.png)

Continuing \
------------

Once you are happy with your entire Session, you will probably want to
to Export the whole thing as a Stereo Mix. Please go ahead to the next
chapter to learn about **Exporting Sessions**.
